## Table Of Contents {: #toc }

## Subject Overview

### Key Characteristics

Mathematics is a science which deals with the objective properties of mental objects. Mental objects are constructed step by step, where the final result should not have any unwanted degrees of freedom left, to avoid differences based on interpretation.

Mental objects can be communicated or conveyed from one mental being to another. Being A can construct an object of arbitrary complexity and - if its description is carefully and exactly crafted - being B can obtain this exact same object to then further work with it on their own. Later down the road, B can share its result with A, and they may even compare their findings.

Mental tools used for analytic purposes may themselves become the analyzed subject. This constant change of an object from being the tool or the subject is quite common while investigating.

Surprisingly, these mental objects by themselves are not what mathematics is about. Neither are carried out calculations, as they just represent applications of various mathematical findings. Mathematics is characterized by the act of actively searching for non-obvious properties and patterns to an extent that it can be considered a science of its own. A mental science, to be exact, which does not require any interaction with the physical world, in contrast to the natural sciences, where experiments govern the scientific process.

### Discovered Or Invented

Imagine a square, which is characterized by the fact that all of its sides are of equal length, and the angles spanned by pairs of two joined sides each are right angles. Even if, without further complex research, one cannot determine the length of the square's diagonal line, it is most definitely constrained and does not differ between different individuals who imagine the square. Its value, or rather formula, is fixed, was always fixed and will always be fixed, from the beginning of time, until the end of time.

We, as conscious, mental beings now enter the adventure to discover various properties of countless mental objects. Before this journey, we were ignorant to them, and afterwards, we gathered knowledge and broadened our horizon.

There is a finite, rather comprehensible amount of basic objects which cannot be broken down any further and are thus to be considered the atoms of mathematics. Their existence cannot be proven, and we have to collectively agree on these postulates. Every theorem whose validity is provable has to now lead step by step from point A to point B, by only making use of axioms and postulates, as well as theorems which have been proven before its own existence (its predecessors, so to speak). From this then logically follows, that every constructed mathematical object, no matter its complexity, is fully constrained and leaves no room for subjective choices.

Could we have made up our set of axioms in a different way? That's a hard question to answer, as it seems impossible to check every possible combination for logical coherency. On the other hand, there have been numerous occasions where axioms which were thought to be coherent proved to lead to unsolvable contradictions. This process of purification lead to the axioms which govern modern mathematics. Personally, I believe that while there may be other choices out there, they are just a different representation of the same underlying concept and are likely to be less natural to our understanding, as we - over all these hundreds of years - would have discovered them otherwise.

What has been most definitely *"invented"* is the way in which we communicate these mental objects. To use a blackboard, a piece of paper, wax tablets, or even modern computers as an extension to our mental space are choices we made, based on what was and is available within our surroundings. A circle, drawn by a compass, is not equivalent with the mental object of a circle. On a blackboard, it would merely be the residue of chalk left alongside a curved pathway, while the mental object is defined as the set of points with equal distance to the origin.

### Formalization

To formalize a mathematical object means to express it without making use of ambiguous means of communication, as in natural languages or - to some degree - even (complex) geometrical constructions. By depicting these objects as strings of symbols from a fixed, well-defined and agreed-upon alphabet, higher precision may be achieved and details which would otherwise be lost become captured. A proof can now be written down as a sequence of strings of mathematical symbols, where each string is stating one exact relationship. These strings nonetheless tend to be surrounded by explanations within natural languages (mainly english) to aid the understanding of their reader, and to get a hold of the thought-process of their discoverer.

Next to the property of exactness, another great advantage is the fact that the process of validating sequences of strings of symbols has now been turned into a mechanical process which computers can take care of. Illogical conclusions can be discovered automatically.

### Applications In Reality

Since mathematics is the science of mental objects and their properties, it really is a true sensation that these objects and models are applicable to processes and relations within reality all the time. If a mathematical object turns out to be a close-enough approximation to a scientific process, then all theorems which hold true for said object will also apply to the approximated process. This property allows scientists to be substantially quicker in spotting behavioral patterns within the universe which would not be visible to the naked eye alone. With all of this accumulated knowledge at our disposal, we can then run simulations of the real world, using our mental objects, and - astonishingly - attain great predictive precision.

Personally, I think that it is of utmost importance that we do not confuse approximations with reality, no matter their apparent precision. Even if our models work well and have revolutionized our abilities as a species, we must not give in to the arrogant urge of feeling superior, feeling like we're in control, like we're the operators of reality. It seems as though many scientists believe that they are bending the universe to their will, when they - for example - *"force"* electric current to carry out calculations through the application of relays, tubes, transistors and the like. This false sense may only increase with the ascension of quantum computing, where we now reach even deeper into the inner workings of reality to *"misuse"* them for our desires. When viewed soberly, it becomes evident that no matter what we discover or *"invent"*, it was there all along, within the space of possibilities, offered freely by the universe. We cannot force it to do anything it does not already offer by itself. Only because our mental objects work well as approximations, we must not conclude that this is how reality works "under the hood", so to speak. Instead of behaving arrogantly and trying to reach beyond our insights, we should show gratitude, be open for new knowledge and acknowledge other logically sound theories which we have not yet been able to neither prove nor disprove.

## Problematic Decisions

### Elitarianism

As with all new knowledge, the knowledge of mathematics tempts its wielder to think higher of themselves, in comparison to all of those who are not yet aware of it. No matter which situation arises, this superiority can be made use of to derive self-confidence, which acts as a means to compensate for other insufficiencies in life.

The inherent need of human beings to become part of a higher cause, or rather to become part of an environment that's inaccessible to others, in return creates the need for elitarianism. In the case that this special and still hidden knowledge would reach the masses, it would not remain being neither special, nor hidden.

While it of course is of great importance that mathematics develops its own domain-specific vocabulary, next to a well-defined set of symbols, these properties are - sadly enough - often times applied to the detriment of newcomers to this science. Instead of explaining theorems to their full extent, crucial details are knowingly (even if sub-consciously) left out and are taken as a given, to make things look more difficult than they really are. Further, fundamental and important questions are often times laughed off and taken as evidence of the lacking intelligence of their questioner, when exactly those lead to the real and profound understanding of the subject.

If the current, entire state of mathematics would be stored in a publicly accessible, central library, broken down into step-by-step derivations, so that everybody could study them iteratively on their spare time, and thus no theorem would remain impossible to grasp, the self-conviction of a multitude of mental scientists would suffer great damage.

This highly egotistical way of going about things is greatly slowing down our progress as a socienty, since countless bright and creative minds are disposed of a great deal of their potential. If it would be possible to derive our current state of progress as a whole within a single lifetime, without any external help or information, then this act would be proving that all of our mathematical predecessors were plagued by insufficient ability and intelligence. Since this assumption seems highly grotesque, I brand it as being illogical and thus conclude, that it is merely impossible for a single mental being to catch up to all progress, let alone come up with new theorems afterwards. We are depending on each other, since we are in dire need of the knowledge of our predecessors, in order to not end up in an endless loop of trying to derive the same knowledge over and over again. It is our responsibility to meet this need and thereby to immortalize the established knowledge for the next generation to come.

Since mathematical derivations are comprised of a multitude of individual steps, and due to inertia on one hand, but also due to the requirement of creativity on the other, which is inherently fluctuating, no single step can happen instantaneously. It can be concluded, that there will always be a minimum duration attached to each derivation. If one is aware of the sheer endless amount of theorems in existence, then it will quickly become apparent why a single mental being will be crushed under all of this weight. The scene noticably changes though, if we manage to take creativity out of the equation by providing a stepwise derivation of each theorem, so that they can be comprehended in a successive manner rather quickly. While it is still impossible to take possession of our current knowledge as a whole, the individual's reach was drastically increased.

Knowledge should not be hidden behind courses, schools, universities or even books, which all come with either monetary and or temporal responsibilities, but rather be public property. We should not be sabotaging each other, but give our best to support one another to flourish as a society.

### Subpar Organization

Not only are scientists making up for the vast minority of the population, but this set still shrinks in size if we only consider those, who truly and deeply understand their niche of the field. How will we ever avoid loosing knowledge, if we don't immortalize it centrally and publically, while we fail at conveying it to our offsprings, and while these scientists are going to leave this earth some day? While this is a serious problem in present times, I think that it also says a lot about us, as a species, considering our current progress after having existed on this planet for such a *long, long* time.

You cannot skip steps the path to scientific enlightenment, which is why it is of paramount importance that we do not only capture our current state of knowledge, but also the ways which have lead up to it. Usually, if a theorem has been established for the first time, there's still room for improvement left. Not only that, but with more time, more progress manifests, which allows us to come back to previous theorems and not only rework and extend them, but to also find completely different ways which lead up to their result. These are often times considered mathematical identities, where two different expressions point at the same mental construction. It is also necessary to capture these alternative routes, as a lot of insight can be derived from them, but to then go ahead (as many teachers and professors do) and act as if any pathway other than the original is sufficient to derive, prove or introduce a theorem is not only pedagogically reprehensible, but also simply perverted.

Next to the need for historical knowledge as described above, I also believe that we owe it to the first discoverer of each theorem to remember their name and their personal story. While we're at least doing better on this part, some of this knowledge is still unrecoverably lost in the ether.

To really guarantee that all these details are captured and preserved forever, a very specific datastructure seems to be the natural solution: *a fully versioned tree*. The root node consists of as little postulates, definitions and axioms as necessary, and is followed by the atoms of mathematics. From these, all theorems in existence span outwards, linking back to all other theorems which were used while deriving them. Each time an update is being made, only the difference is stored, to later provide a differential view. Theorems go through stages, and all of these stages should be remembered, while updates need to be commented and justified. Such a tree would explode in size rather quickly, which is why organization as well as partial and filtered rendering become very important. A structure like this would easily identify circular proofs and truly separated disciplines within mathematics, while established bridges would stand out and aid the understanding of their viewer. This world could be explored in a recursive fashion, where topics of interest can be studied down to a tee. Different people could specialize in various subfields, which is by design impossible in classrooms or lectures, as one or two teachers just don't have the resources to accomodate each and everybody. The need for crowded and overall depressing (from the viewpoint of dedicated students) classrooms would fade, and students could learn either on their own, or in small groups, in places they feel most comfortable.

While this is a goal too big to ever near completion within a single being's lifetime, various highly appreciated long-term projects only came to be because a single person pushed the idea forwards in the beginning, doing all of the hard work. I'm very much convinced that it is not yet too late, and that there is still hope in getting this utopia manifested from my daydreams into reality.